Abstract:
Patterns of variability in gastropod shell morphology were used to examine modes of morphological divergence and their implications for intra-lacustrine divergence. Two thiarid gastropods endemic to Lake Tanganyika, that are both stenotopic and rock-dwelling, were investigated because they are believed to be equally subject to environmental barriers to dispersal. A model of allopatric divergence, facilitated by habitat fragmentation, predicts that variation among populations should be large relative to the variation within them, and that organisms equally subject to environmental barriers to dispersal should exhibit similar magnitude and character of morphological divergence. Spekia and members of the Lavigeria species flock appear only in rocky, wave-battered shoals and neither gastropod is known to exhibit wide dispersal. Intervening reaches of sandy and muddy substrates are thought to be barriers to gene flow. Analyses of variance of factor scores reveal that interpopulation morphological variance is greater than intrapopulation variance for both genera, suggesting that divergence is allopatric. However, Spekia shows little morphological variability compared to shallow-water Lavigeria. In graphical analyses of factor scores, Lavigeria forms discrete clusters of morphology related to differences in environment, geographic distribution, and timing of larval broods, all indicative of speciation. The model of allopatric divergence controlled by environmental barriers to dispersal must be reviewed because of two incongruent results: sympatry of divergent morphs of Lavigeria, and the observation that members of Lavigeria show much greater endemic divergence than members of Spekia, even though they are thought to be equally poor dispersers.

Potential questions:
    - After changing `ShellType` to being numeric, could it be a better response?
    - Are there any clusters that could potentially provide any additional insight?
    - Does the data contain an equal amount of `Type1` and `Type2` records?
    - What could be a cause for corelation between the different variables?
    -


Morphometric Measures for Lavigeria Nassa:
1. Height of Shell
2. Maximum width of shell perpendicular to the axis of coiling
3. Apertural height (AperHt)
4. Apertural width perpendicular to apertural height (AperWd)
5. Width of the whorl at the 15th axial rib as counted from a standardized whorl of width 2.0 mm (WD15)
6. Width of the whorl at the 30th axial rib (WD20)
7. Height of the whorl parallel to the axis of coiling at the 15th rib
8. Height of the whorl at the 20th rib (HT20)

Morphometric Measures for Spekia Zonata:
1. Apertural lip thickness at the thinnest point (LIP)
2.


ShellType:
Width:
Length:
AperHt: Apertural Height
AperWdt: Apertural Width
LU:
LipWdt: Measures the apertural lip thickness

